Welcome back to the second part of this code challenge.
There are several more exercises to go, but I think you are going to find them interesting, thought
provoking and a great learning experience.
Now an exercise three at the end of the previous video, you ran t tests comparing the two categories
and there were four words per category.
Now the thing is that a significant t test could actually have resulted from a given neuron showing
really strong preference for one target word, and then all the other target words have mixed activations,
maybe around even zero.
That would be a problem with the results.
And the way to confirm that would be to check whether the neurons are really active only for one target
word, or whether they show a similar category differentiation to all the words in each category, and
that is something you are going to check here in this exercise.
So pick one layer.
I picked layer 16, but you could pick any other layer.
And then in that layer find the two projection neurons in that layer that have the maximum and the minimum
T values.
Then you want to make a scatterplot with all of their activations to all the 40 tokens.
Target tokens separated according to the target words.
So you can visualize all of those data in a scatterplot that looks something like this.
So in layer 16 it turned out that neuron index 749 had the largest positive t value.
And neuron index 177 had the largest negative t value.
And then in this scatter plot.
I'm showing the activations for the actual word toothpaste for all five appearances of the word toothpaste
for this neuron.
So neuron 749 and also for this neuron, which was neuron number 177.
And of course, you now know that this is actually the activation for just the token paste, but it
is preceded by the word tooth or the token for the word tooth.
Now the question in at hand here is what do the activations look like from these two neurons from all
of the other target words?
For example, if you would see that all of the activations for all these other words here are clustered
around zero for the other targets, then the T test is really just driven by this one word over here.
Now, if you were doing this for a real research project, you would want to extend this analysis to
all of these significant neurons and all the layers.
But here for this exercise, we're going to keep things simple and just focus on a visual qualitative
investigation for two cells from one layer for all of the 40 activations.
Okay.
So that's for exercise four.
I hope you enjoy working through this one.
And now I will switch to Python and discuss the results.
Here I set up a variable for the layer that I'm going to work with for this exercise.
16 is a great layer.
You can of course change this and explore around if you like.
So then here I'm searching through all of the T values for this layer, for all the neurons, and I'm
picking out the index corresponding to the maximum t value and the minimum t value.
And then in this plot I'm looping over all of the target values.
So this is the eight different target words toothpaste, Paste, toothbrush and so on for all of the
eight target words.
Then here.
So inside this loop I am getting the activations from this layer, from this neuron, the max, the
neuron with the maximum T value, and all of the five cases where the target value equals the one that
I have in this for loop.
And then yeah, I'm plotting those here.
I'm plotting those as blue circles.
The one for the minimum T is going to be with red squares.
And this is just a little bit of a offset a horizontal offset.
So we can see both of these results very close to each other and further apart.
Yet with some spacing in between the other target words.
And that's basically the idea that we are doing here.
So now we see that for the blue neurons.
So this is the one that showed the largest t value, the maximum T value.
What you would ideally want to see.
The ideal result here is that all of these blue dots over here are larger than all of these blue dots
over here.
Why is that the desired result here?
You know, this result is actually defined by a t test over all 20 of these versus all of these.
So we want these activations to be large for the dentist dental hygiene terms and the furniture related
terms.
We want these to be low and vice versa for this neuron here.
177 because that showed activations or t test in exactly the opposite direction.
And that's what we see here.
So all of these red squares are above all of these red squares over here.
So in other words the blue neuron really likes things about the dentist.
It doesn't really care that much about furniture.
And the red neuron really likes interior furniture.
At least, you know, maybe this is an exception, although this activation is still above the activation
for these words.
And yeah, so this red neuron just doesn't really care that much about dental hygiene.
And now for exercise five.
The goal of exercise five is to repeat the analysis in unseen data.
And the idea here, the motivation is that it's always possible that when you get great results from
a limited data set, so small sample sizes, it's possible that the findings actually just reflect overfitting
the model to a limited sample size data set.
So therefore I have prepared a second data set of new sentences.
And to make things a little more interesting and a little bit more challenging, these sentences here
are not organised into one target word per sentence and one category per sentence.
Instead, each sentence here can contain several target words across both of the categories.
And here you see the first couple of example sentences in this data set.
So this first one for example she left her toothbrush on the nightstand.
So there are two target words in this sentence.
And one comes from each category.
So you can find all of these sentences in the helper and in the solutions file.
Now to begin, you need to loop through all of these sentences and find the tokens where the target
or the token indices where the targets appear in each sentence.
And when you print out your results of that for loop, it will look something like this.
So for example, sentence zero has two targets in them and this one appears.
Or at least the last token in this target word appears at index four.
And the last token in this target word appears at index eight.
You can also count the total number of appearances of each target word, and it's not perfectly balanced
the way it was in data Set one.
But that's okay.
It's close enough.
Now, the way to organize the target indices for the analysis here is different from what you did in
exercise two, because here now in exercise five we can have multiple targets per sentence.
The solution that I came up with is to create a matrix of sentences by token position.
So I initialized this entire matrix to be full of minus ones.
And then I populated each element in the matrix that has a target according to the target number.
So now I can just find all of the matrix indices in this matrix that have values of zero through three.
That will give me all the dental hygiene words, and then all the tokens from four through seven come
from the furniture category, and the minus one is a non-target token.
Once you have this matrix, you can push this new batch of text data through the model and again confirm
the activations of the hooked MLP projection neurons and also the size of any one of those projection
tensors.
So there's 20 of these new sentences.
And with the padding they end up being 25 tokens per sequence.
So this is all you have to do for this exercise.
In the next exercise you'll run a t test on this second data set.
But now you should pause the video and get the data set set up so you are ready for the statistics.
And now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
So here you see all of the new sentences.
The new data set Some of them are a little bit weird.
They were created by Claude I.
Where's the weird one?
There's one of.
Oh, yeah.
This one.
She placed her toothbrush in the dishwasher.
Silverware to sanitize it thoroughly.
I have no idea if that is a good idea or a terrible idea.
Uh, it's not something I've ever done.
I'm not taking responsibility for the actual content or suggestions of these sentences anyway.
Uh.
Let's see.
So then here I'm tokenizing them and.
Yeah, just this is just to give an example, you can see also quite some padding in here for this first
sentence for example.
Okay.
So now this code is basically the same as what I showed in the uh exercise one.
And also what you saw in two videos ago when I introduced you to identifying indices of multi token
targets.
This one is only slightly different because I begin with this matrix here.
Target vowels underscore.
Matt.
And then here I'm initializing this to be sentences by sequence length.
So by 25 tokens per including padding.
And I initialize these to be minus ones.
And the reason why I'm using these while I'm initializing this matrix to have minus ones is so that
later on I can identify all of the zero value elements in this matrix, and that is the locations in
which the first target word appears.
So now I can run this code.
And here you see that each sentence has a multiple appearances of target words from both categories.
And here I'm flattening that matrix.
Actually let me just show you what this looks like.
Target vowels underscore Matt.
So it's lots of minus ones.
And then we get some other non minus one integers in here.
And again those correspond to both the location and the identity of the target words.
Okay.
So then I can just flatten that matrix.
So vectorize that matrix and then just figure out what are the unique elements in that matrix.
And then I can see that for example there were six appearances of the word toothpaste.
So there you go.
And here I'm making an image of that matrix.
And as I've said a bajillion times before in this course, don't stress if you, uh, you know, like
some of the details of getting this stuff to work.
This is like detail nuances of matplotlib.
If you can correctly create this matrix, then don't worry about the visualization stuff.
Okay.
And finally push all those data through the model.
Uh, even though I'm only running this on the CPU, it is not a lot of data, and this is the only time
we really need to run this second batch of data through.
So in my humble opinion, it's really not worth connecting to a GPU just to wait for, you know, that
would save you like maybe 20s or something.
Okay.
And then here we can confirm the sizes of these activations.
So yeah, we get activations hooked from all 36 of these layers.
And each activation is of size 20 sentences, 25 tokens per sequence and 1280 neurons or projections
from the MLP layer.
This is the final exercise in this code challenge.
The goal is to perform a t test for all the neurons and all the layers on the second independent data
set, and then compare those findings from the second data set to the findings from the initial data
set from earlier in this code challenge in the previous video.
Now you can see that I am creating two matrices for the t and p values that are the same sizes as the
corresponding matrices from the first data set.
Okay, so here I'm actually looping over all of the layers and then looping over all of the neurons,
extracting the activations for this neuron in this layer, and then running a t test and storing the
t value and the p value.
Now this looks a little bit different from how I did it in exercise three.
And the reason is that in exercise three, there was only one target token per sentence.
And the first 20 sentences were from one category and the next 20 sentences were from the other category.
So the data were organized in a way that was a little bit more amenable to avoiding these two for loops.
If you want to avoid these two for loops, it actually would be possible.
You'd have to add some additional for loops before you run the T tests in order to extract the activations
for the correct tokens for each sentences, keeping in mind that the sentences contain multiple tokens
from both categories.
So yeah, the tricky part of this code here and this for loop is really just this missing line of code
here.
You need to extract the data from all of the dental hygiene category target locations for this neuron
for this layer versus the furniture target locations using that matrix mask that you created in the
previous exercise.
Anyway, by the end of this double for loop here, or however you choose to implement it, you will
have t values and p values for the same neurons for the two different data sets.
And then we want to see how they relate to each other.
And that is what I am visualizing here.
So on the x axis I have data set one.
And on the y axis I have the t values from data set two.
Now when both of the tests from both data sets were statistically significant, then I drew them as
green squares.
When one test was significant but the other one wasn't, then those are red circles.
And when neither tests.
So the neurons for which neither test was significant, then I give a.
I visualize that using these little red x's okay.
So I call this the pistachio cannoli plot.
And if you have no idea why I call this the pistachio cannoli plot, then you can do a Google image
search for pistachio cannoli, and you can see if you agree or disagree with my interpretation.
Anyway, the point is, there is obviously a strong correlation between these two data sets, and that
indicates that the effects that we saw in exercise three were not just overfitting data set one, because
we get the same patterns with data set two.
So it is the same target words.
But we have very different sentences.
Okay.
So visually it is quite compelling.
But it would be nice to have some quantitative measure of the concordance between the results for data
set one and data set two.
Now I want you to figure out how to quantify that concordance.
In other words the consistency of the neurons responding to data set one and data set two.
There are several ways that you can quantify this relationship.
I am not going to tell you the formula that I used to get this result results here, because I want
you to use your imagination and think about what it would mean for the results to be similar or distinct
between two different data sets coming from the same neurons.
Now, I can tell you that the formula that I used is based on looking at the four quadrants in this
plot.
So cutting up this plot into four pieces and seeing where the data fall in those four pieces.
But you can think of some other ways of looking at concordance, and perhaps you will get different
numbers from what I got up here.
Of course, when I switch to code, I will discuss this, but I want you to have the freedom to think
of this for yourself.
Anyway, this hint down here is just a general tip for this visualization and analysis.
I'm not separating the data into the different layers here.
So this tip is just making your life a little bit easier by ignoring the The transformer blocks and
pulling all of the MLP neurons from all the layers into one big vector.
So that's it for this exercise.
And that's also the final exercise in this code challenge.
I hope you enjoy making the pistachio cannoli plot.
And now I will switch to code and discuss the findings and the possibilities for thinking about concordances.
So here is that double for loop to run all of the T tests for all of the individual neurons.
This one does take a little bit more time.
It's close to three minutes compared to just a few seconds from exercise three, where it was simpler
basically because we could vectorize everything and we only had to call this t test function once on
matrices instead of having to call it, you know, 36 times, 180 times, whatever that is.
It's tens of thousands of times that we're calling this.
Okay.
And again, the reason is that the data set itself is considerably more complicated.
And also as I mentioned, it would be possible to reorganize the data.
So you need to call this function only once.
And basically that would involve having other for loops loop over all of the target words and collect
all of those into a matrix of activations for the targets for the two different categories.
If you want to code that up, that's fantastic.
I definitely support that.
Okay.
But the way that I did this is to find all of the activations for this layer and this neuron that correspond
to a target values in this target values matrix of less than four and greater than minus one.
So this means the target values that are zero, 1 or 2 versus those are all the dental category words
versus wherever is greater than three, which would mean target values four, five, six, and seven.
And that is all of the furniture words.
Okay, so this is still going to take another minute or so to calculate.
So now we've gotten that done.
Here I am vectorizing all of these matrices for convenience because yeah from this point forward I am
not going to worry about the different layers.
So I'm just pulling all the data together.
So data one t values and p values and data two t values and p values.
And then here actually let me just run this.
So we have a plot to look at.
And just as a quick reminder when neither test for data set one nor data set two is significant.
That's all the red stuff in the middle when one set was significant.
So this neuron, let's say, had a significant T value from data set one, but not from data set two.
And that you see here.
So data set one value is like minus nine.
And here for data set two it was like minus one.
So this is like partial concordance.
And then those I drew as red dots.
And then when the neuron was statistically significantly different for both test one and test two that
I called or I labeled a green dot.
So how do I quantify that.
That is what I do up here.
So the neurons where data one p value is below the significance threshold.
And data £0.02 value is also below the significance threshold.
Now this is a Boolean vector.
This is a Boolean vector.
I transform these into integers and then I add them together.
And that means that this vector here comprises three values.
It's zeros where neither was significant, ones where one was significant and two where they were both
significant.
Now, what I don't get from this particular vector is which ones were significant for which data set.
It's obvious from looking at the plots.
These ones are significant for data one and not sorry data two and not data one.
Vice versa for this wedge over here.
But that's not explicitly encoded into this vector.
But that's fine okay.
Now here.
Uh, yeah.
And then this is just the plotting.
I'm not really going to discuss that.
So you can see I'm plotting the, uh, t values, the neurons where neither is significant.
One or both are significant.
The last thing I want to discuss is the concordance analysis.
And here what I considered is that basically what we want is for all of the neurons to be either in
this quadrant.
So they're both negative or they are both in this quadrant.
So they both have positive t values when they are non-significant t values.
It's a little bit unclear about how we should incorporate those.
They are, you know, like all of these are numerically consistent between data one and data two, in
the sense that the T value goes in the same direction for the two data sets, but they're not statistically
significant.
So we cannot really interpret them as meaningfully different from zero.
But certainly cases like these indicate a lack of concordance.
So these neurons showed a significant positive T value on data set two and a non-significant but at
least numerically negative value on data set one.
Okay.
So what I did to get this number up here is basically have a ratio here.
And here's the numerator and the denominator.
So for the numerator I look at the sign of the t value.
And I just say is the sign the same between data set one and data set two.
That's here.
So are they both negative or are they both positive?
And it's not sufficient.
It's not enough for them both to have the same size sign.
They also both need to be significant.
So they both need to be less have p values less than the threshold.
And if both of those are true then that goes into the numerator.
And then the denominator is just all of the neurons that are significant.
So basically what I'm doing is looking at the concordance of the green squares and the red circles.
And I'm ignoring the red plus signs altogether.
If you came up with a different measure of concordance then that's great.
You can tell me all about it in the Q&A.
Well, that was quite a challenging code challenge, but I hope you feel that you got a lot of value
out of it.
I think a general, practical take home message from this code challenge is that there are many solutions
and analyses that initially seem pretty simple conceptually, but turn out to be quite tricky from a
coding and practical perspective.
Another general point is that one advantage of doing empirical research with Llms is that it's usually
pretty easy to get more data to confirm your findings.
You know, if you're doing like neuroscience research with Parkinson's patients.
It's just really difficult to collect enough data in the first place.
So that leads to a whole different set of limitations and difficulties.
Now, to be sure, mechanistic interpretability of llms is not easy.
But at least one good thing is that unless you are doing something that is like really narrow and specific,
you're probably never going to run out of data for running analyses to confirm the statistical robustness
of your findings.